Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



AI-POWERED AND BUILT WITH... JAVASCRIPT?

Aug 11, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Projecting several years ahead, digital builders will unlock some of the most
exciting innovations. Six technology trends are positioning JavaScript
developers to reap the rewards of a society increasingly hungry for AI
applications.

Python has been synonymous with AI and Machine Learning tasks for years and
remains the primary language of choice. The Python ecosystem is rich with
powerful open-source libraries, such as TensorFlow, Keras, Pandas, and Numpy,
purpose-built for tackling complex data processing and AI tasks.

That said, the shifts we’ll examine in this post empower JavaScript developers
to build applications that connect multiple AI services and deploy these
experiences globally across any device, from desktops to tablets to electric
vehicle panels, with incredible speed.


1: THE EDGE IS EXPANDING, INCREASING DEMAND FOR AI APPS THAT RUN ON ANY DEVICE

The Edge comprises smartphones, robots, autonomous lawnmowers, swarms of drones,
sensors, and the Internet of Things. As more devices and users come online, the
globe-spanning network of data and intelligence expands, requiring new control
panels and data visualization dashboards.

Responsive web design empowers developers to build one web application that runs
well on large screens like TVs or desktops, medium screens like laptops and
tablets, and small screens like mobile phones. JavaScript is ideally suited for
building responsive web experiences accessible on any device because modern
JavaScript frameworks provide this functionality out of the box.


2: HEAVY-DUTY COMPUTE CLUSTERS IN THE CLOUD ARE AVAILABLE VIA APIS.

Cloud data centers can train and host the most powerful AI models.

The models we know today that help us code, reason through complex tasks, and
generate writing, images, and audio upon request, can do so because they've been
trained, and are running on, large clusters of highly specialized supercomputers
— at tremendous cost.

For the foreseeable future, the cloud will likely remain home to the machinery
required to support the ongoing development and effective operation of the AI
capabilities we know today.

For everyone except the most prominent players in the tech market, it makes more
sense to call upon cloud-based services as needed to perform GPU-intensive tasks
like fine-tuning models or performing predictions with existing models.

How does one tap into these powerful behemoth machines on an as-needed basis?
Via the third technology trend: powerful application programming interfaces
(APIs).


3: JAVASCRIPT DEVELOPERS KNOW APIS. THEY CONNECT THE EDGE AND THE MIGHTY CLOUD.

APIs are potent building blocks of functionality that developers can combine to
produce rich experiences without being a deep expert in every computer science
discipline that was necessary to build the APIs in the first place.

It’s this abstraction layer that makes APIs so powerful. A developer must only
understand the usage of APIs to harness advanced storage, image recognition,
semantic search, logical reasoning, data crunching, and high-speed retrieval
capabilities without reading a single research paper. APIs empower builders to
compose rich experiences very quickly.

The worldwide developer community has proliferated decades of tooling, best
practices, books, talks, documentation, and patterns, making API creation and
consumption a bread-and-butter skill for almost every web developer working
today.

Since APIs are the lingua franca of the Internet and its builders, you can see a
decision, such as OpenAI’s, to make their powerful models available via API for
what it is: a disruptive empowerment of software developers and their end users.

All programming languages can call APIs, but JavaScript has well-established
patterns for handling the asynchronous nature of calling REST and JSON-based
APIs in a performant manner. continue to simplify the weaving together of
multiple asynchronous operations. Sometimes, JavaScript can even be elegant.

JavaScript consistently becomes more usable. Developers rally around the
patterns that best enable them to produce rich experiences quickly.

JavaScript uniquely positions its developers to build the frontend and backend
of their applications in a single language, enabling them to connect clients on
the Edge with the heavy-duty AI services running in the cloud. Consider the
possibilities when JavaScript developers combine interfaces their users can
touch, drag and speak to with today’s and tomorrow’s most potent AI models.


4: JAVASCRIPT FRAMEWORKS BAKE IN EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS. HOSTING
PLATFORMS DEPLOY FRAMEWORKS DIRECTLY.

Frameworks like Next.js encode years of hard-won learning around the fastest and
most effective ways to build and deploy web applications. Hosting providers are
optimizing their infrastructure to deploy JavaScript frameworks directly,
requiring zero configuration or DevOps knowledge to push a full-stack
application into production.

JavaScript developers can rapidly iterate on their application locally, then
perform a git push command to deploy their application on infrastructure that
scales to support millions of users.

This deployment pipeline allows modern JavaScript developers to leverage to
their advantage: “Speed of iteration beats quality of iteration.”

For JavaScript developers, the loop starting with a killer app idea rattling
around in their brain and ending with a live prototype they can link to their
manager on the opposite side of the earth has never been shorter.


5. DIGITAL BUILDERS WHO COMPOSE AI SERVICES AND ITERATE QUICKLY WILL WIN.

Forthcoming standout applications will compose pipelines of AI services to
perform feats of productivity and intelligence not previously possible. Imagine
combining computer vision APIs that identify objects in a satellite feed with an
advanced Large Language Model (LLM) that can reason about the scene and a to
retrieve context from long-term memory.

Apps could scan for deadly wildfires as they’re beginning, look up emergency
response assets geographically closest to the start of the fire, and route them
around traffic to help humans squash a devastating fire before it reaches full
strength, all while issuing alerts to the smartphones of everyone who lives in
the area so that they can get their families and pets to safety.

These advanced solutions, and others we can’t yet conceive of, will belong to
the digital builders who can most rapidly compose AI services, test locally,
iterate, and deploy globally to all form factors - from smartphones to drone
panels to electric vehicle dashboards.

When developers can rapidly weave together the latest AI services and tap into
global sensor networks, data feeds, and remotely operable devices, they see the
Edge as a programmable extension of their imagination. They can connect
intelligent agents to perform work that is too dangerous or tedious for humans.
It’s truly a remarkable time to be alive. And it’s a perfect time to learn how
to code in JavaScript.

But if you still feel squeamish at the mention of JavaScript powering complex
services in production, consider the players who have already used Node.js as
part of their production tech stack, such as Netflix, PayPal, LinkedIn, Walmart,
Uber, eBay, and even , to name a few.


6. JAVASCRIPT RECEIVES TOOLING IMPROVEMENTS AND ROBUST AI LIBRARIES.

Transformers.js is a JavaScript library functionally equivalent to HuggingFace’s
transformers Python library. Transformers.js allows developers to include
natural language processing (NLP), computer vision capabilities, speech
recognition, classification, and more in pure JavaScript. This library is just
one example of how the JavaScript ecosystem continues to receive powerful AI
tools that were initially the sole purview of Python libraries.

Pinecone’s fully managed vector database, which provides long-term memory for
AI, is available via and .

LangChain is one of the most popular open-source frameworks for working with
LLMs and building Generative AI applications. Notably, it is available in both
Python and JavaScript.

TypeScript recently brought type safety to JavaScript, empowering developers to
refactor large codebases more confidently and build large applications with a
team more effectively.

Developer-facing tooling continues to receive tremendous investment from the
open-source community and critical sponsors, and given the language’s enduring
popularity and steadily increasing capability, we see no signs of this
investment slowing down.


WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR JAVASCRIPT AND PYTHON DEVELOPERS?

Is Python going away? No. Projects such as will improve the developer and
deployment experience for the Python community.

But the expanding appetite for data-rich applications that can run anywhere, the
accessibility of advanced AI capabilities that are one API call away, and the
ongoing marriage of powerful JavaScript frameworks to highly optimized
deployment platforms represent unprecedented empowerment for JavaScript
developers. It is an excellent time to be a JavaScript developer building in the
AI space.




Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates