Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



WHAT IS VECTOR SEARCH? 2024 GUIDE FOR DEVELOPERS

Jun 22, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F55ba297cbfc34cf9685a8773f612c28e5a316745-230x230.png&w=3840&q=100]

VP of Marketing

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As a developer, you may only have the bandwidth to explore machine learning to
the extend that it offers solutions to your present problems. For many
developers, the present problem is vector similarity search. The solution is
Pinecone.

is a managed vector database that provides vector search (or “similarity
search”) for developers with a straightforward API and usage-based pricing. (And
it’s .)

While it may be encouraging to hear that a SaaS solution exists for your data
science needs, you still might feel lost. What is vector search? How or why
would you use it? In this article, we’ll walk through everything you need to get
started with vector search using Pinecone. Let’s go!


WHAT IS VECTOR SEARCH?

If you’ve ever used a LIKE query in SQL, then you’ve performed a very simple
form of , though it’s unlikely that any ML theorist or practitioner would say as
much. In reality though, vector search is fundamentally the same exercise.

When searching for similar text, there must be some kind of metric to check for
overlap in the data. For text, this is simple: are the characters in the strings
you’re searching over close to the ones you have in your search string?
Depending on your background, you may have even heard technical terms like or ,
which are precise metrics for describing the similarity (or dissimilarity) of
strings.


HOW DOES A VECTOR SEARCH ENGINE WORK?

For more complicated data sets, it’s also possible to make use of metrics like
these. This is where vector based search shines, but how does it work?

In order to measure the distance between items in a particular data set, we need
a programmatic way to quantify these things and their differences. Regardless of
the types of objects we’re searching through, we use “vectors” or “vector
embeddings” to convert the data we’re analyzing into simpler representations.
Then, we check for similarity on those representations while still maintaining
the deeper meaning of the objects themselves.


WHAT ARE VECTOR SEARCH EMBEDDINGS?

At this point, we’ve defined an unfamiliar concept with an even more unfamiliar
concept, but don’t be concerned. are really just a simplified numerical
representation of complex data, used to make it easier to run generic
machine-learning algorithms on sets of that data. By taking real-world objects
and translating them to vector embeddings — numerical representations — those
numbers can be fed into machine learning algorithms to determine .


VECTOR SEARCH USE CASES

For example, let’s consider the phrase “one in a million.” Is this phrase more
similar to “once in a lifetime” or more similar to “a million to one”? You might
have some intuition about which pairing is more similar. By creating a vector
embedding for each of these phrases, machine learning goes beyond human
intuition to generate actual metrics to quantify that similarity.

If you’re thinking about how to get vector embeddings but coming from an SQL
background, what might come to mind are which — if used correctly in cleverly
crafted queries — could yield some sort of “all of this data boils down to a
single number” result. At best, though, an SQL query can only perform really
simple aggregations to distill out a final numerical representation.

Obtaining a vector embedding of real value requires some machine-learning
techniques and a good understanding of the problem space.


VECTOR SEARCH EXAMPLES

Image data, for example, is represented numerically based on the pixel values of
each image. It already has the form of a vector embedding. But what about cases
where obtaining a numerical representation isn’t so straightforward? Let’s
consider some examples.

If we wanted to determine , we might look at people who had watched and rated
the same movies, along with what other movies they had watched and rated. To
find , we could look at customer purchases and see who has bought other items in
the same purchase.

These examples are too complex and cumbersome to be handled manually. This data
needs to be fed into some kind of neural network to reduce the number of
dimensions of these vectors (length of the list of numbers). The following
diagram shows how this reduction might work for simple object examples:

Diagram showing how objects like images, text and audio are transformed into
vectors to complete various tasks like object recognition, deduplication,
translation, anomaly detection and more.
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/453a3f4727be235b22c62e3f3f9553eeb39547a4-1828x958.png]


Depending on the data you’re working with, there may be existing models you can
use. But if you’re working with a unique dataset or use case, you’ll need to put
some time into ensuring your model will capture your data well. For more generic
situations — such as text data — we can use a more widely available model like .
That model is trained against a wide collection of text data to determine
similarities and differences between the concepts that real words represent.

Regardless of the model you’re using, though, Pinecone can help you search
through the generated vector embeddings to find similar items.


WHAT TO DO WITH YOUR VECTOR EMBEDDINGS

Once you have a vector embedding, you need to be able to run queries against it.
This is where Pinecone comes in. Rather than requiring you to learn all kinds of
techniques for searching through your data, Pinecone provides managed vector
search. You store vector embeddings with IDs that tie your data back to the
objects they represent, allowing you to search through that data with a
straightforward API and client. A store of vector embeddings and their IDs is
called a “vector index.”

Creating a vector index is quite simple with Pinecone’s :

import pinecone
pinecone.init(YOUR_API_KEY)
index = pinecone.create_index("my-new-index")



(Java and Go clients are coming soon.)

You’ll need to and choose a name for your index. There are other parameters —
such as the metric measuring similarity between vectors searching your data —
but when you’re just starting, the defaults should be good enough.

Once you have an index created, you can insert your data as a tuple containing
the id and vector representation of each object in your data set. Pinecone is
blazing fast, able to index 10,000 tuples or more in just a second.

Querying an index is very simple. You can perform a unary query with a single
vector, or you can query with a list of vectors too. All you need is a vector or
a list of vectors you want to find similarities for and how many results
(integer) you want Pinecone to return:

index.query(queries=vectors, top_k=integer)



In the above line, top_k is a reference to the to any given vector. If you’re
not familiar with that algorithm, Pinecone’s usage is analogous to a LIMIT
clause from SQL. All of the k-nearest neighbors analysis is taken care of by the
platform! Pinecone will return IDs that match. It also returns a score that
shows its confidence in the match.


TRY PINECONE'S MANAGED VECTOR SEARCH SOLUTIONS

By now, you should have a better understanding of what vector search is and how
Pinecone can help you integrate vector search into your application. If you’re
interested in learning more, try out some techniques from and start playing
around with Pinecone and its vector search API yourself.

If you find you’re ready to get going with Pinecone on your own product, don’t
hesitate to or . We’ll be happy to help you get started!

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F55ba297cbfc34cf9685a8773f612c28e5a316745-230x230.png&w=3840&q=100]

VP of Marketing

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates