Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



COOKIE POLICY

Dec 3, 2020

This Cookie Policy explains how Pinecone Systems, Inc. (“Pinecone”, “we”, “us”
or “our”) uses cookies and similar technologies in connection with the website
and any other website that we own or control and which posts or links to this
Privacy Policy (collectively, the “Websites”).

Our explains how we collect and use information from and about you when you use
our Websites. This Cookie Policy explains more about how we use cookies and your
related choices.


WHAT ARE COOKIES?

Cookies are small data files that are placed on your computer or mobile device
when you visit a website. Cookies serve different purposes, like helping us
understand how a website is being used, letting you navigate between pages
efficiently, remembering your preferences and generally improving your browsing
experience.

Our Websites may use both session cookies (which expire once you close your web
browser) and persistent cookies (which stay on your computer or mobile device
until you delete them).

We may use two broad categories of cookies: (1) first party cookies, served
directly by us to your computer or mobile device, which we use to recognize your
computer or mobile device when it revisits our Websites; and (2) third party
cookies, which are served by service providers or business partners on our
Websites, and can be used by these parties to recognize your computer or mobile
device when it visits other websites. Third party cookies can be used for a
variety of purposes, including website analytics and social media features.


WHAT TYPES OF COOKIES AND SIMILAR TRACKING TECHNOLOGIES DOES PINECONE USE ON THE
WEBSITES?

On the Websites, we may use cookies and other tracking technologies in the
following categories described in the table below.

TypeDescriptionAdvertisingThese cookies are used by advertising companies to
collect information about how you use our Websites and other websites over time.
These companies use this information to show you ads they believe will be
relevant to you within our Websites and elsewhere, and to measure how the ads
perform.AnalyticsThese cookies help us understand how our Websites is performing
and being used. These cookies may work with web beacons included in emails we
send to track which emails are opened and which links are clicked by
recipients.EssentialThese cookies are necessary to allow the technical operation
of our Websites (e.g., they enable you to move around on a website and to use
its features).Functionality/performanceThese cookies enhance the performance and
functionality of our Websites.


OTHER TECHNOLOGIES

In addition to cookies, our Websites may use other technologies, such as Flash
technology and pixel tags to collect information automatically.


BROWSER WEB STORAGE

We may use browser web storage (including via HTML5), also known as locally
stored objects (“LSOs”), for similar purposes as cookies. Browser web storage
enables the storage of a larger amount of data than cookies. Your web browser
may provide functionality to clear your browser web storage.


WEB BEACONS

We may also use web beacons (which are also known as pixel tags and clear GIFs)
on our Websites and in our HTML formatted emails to track the actions of users
on our Websites and interactions with our emails. Unlike cookies, which are
stored on the hard drive of your computer or mobile device by a website, pixel
tags are embedded invisibly on webpages or within HTML formatted emails. Pixel
tags are used to demonstrate that a webpage was accessed or that certain content
was viewed, typically to measure the success of our marketing campaigns or
engagement with our emails and to compile statistics about usage of the Website,
so that we can manage our content more effectively.


YOUR CHOICES

Most browsers let you remove or reject cookies. To do this, follow the
instructions in your browser settings. Many browsers accept cookies by default
until you change your settings. Please note that if you set your browser to
disable cookies, the Websites may not work properly. For more information about
cookies, including how to see what cookies have been set on your computer or
mobile device and how to manage and delete them, visit . If you do not accept
our cookies, you may experience some inconvenience in your use of our Websites.
For example, we may not be able to recognize your computer or mobile device and
you may need to log in every time you visit our Websites. Users may opt out of
receiving targeted advertising on websites through members of the Network
Advertising Initiative by or the Digital Advertising Alliance by . European
users may opt out of receiving targeted advertising on websites through members
of the European Interactive Digital Advertising Alliance by , selecting the
user’s country, and then clicking “Choices” (or similarly-titled link). Please
note that we also may work with companies that offer their own opt-out
mechanisms and may not participate in the opt-out mechanisms that we linked
above.

If you choose to opt-out of targeted advertisements, you will still see
advertisements online but they may not be relevant to you. Even if you do choose
to opt out, not all companies that serve online behavioral advertising are
included in this list, and so you may still receive some cookies and tailored
advertisements from companies that are not listed.


CHANGES

Information about the cookies we use may be updated from time to time, so please
check back on a regular basis for any changes.


QUESTIONS

If you have any question about this Cookie Policy, please submit our

Pinecone Systems, Inc548 Market StPMB 19327San Francisco, CA 94104-5401


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

