Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



CHIPPER CASH THWARTS FRAUDSTERS IN REAL-TIME WITH PINECONE

is a financial technology company on a mission to unlock barriers to banking in
Africa. Providing a frictionless way to send and receive money cross-border and
offering financial inclusivity, Chipper Cash has revolutionized money transfers
for more than five million customers in Africa and beyond.

While the user base is growing quickly, Chipper Cash is constantly looking for
ways to acquire new users and drive more transactions. One way they do this is
through paid promotions for new users. For example, “Buy stocks worth at least
$2 before the end of the week. Get a ₦500 reward!”

While these promos attract many new users, they also incentivize people looking
for loopholes to create multiple accounts and maliciously access the promos. The
company knew they needed a faster, more reliable way to verify new users and
block duplicate users in real-time to prevent fraudulent sign-ups.

Challenge


CATCHING AND PREVENTING FRAUDSTERS IN THE ACT

Chipper Cash used a third-party service to provide security checks and verify
identities of new users. Not only did these checks help identify duplicate
accounts, but they also checked for fake or stolen documents (e.g.
government-issued IDs) as part of their KYC checks . This solution worked well
at first, but as the volume of users grew across the app’s seven supported
countries, the verification process became a bottleneck — especially during
promos.

This led to an uptick in malicious users creating multiple accounts and “gaming”
the system. Incentivized by the new-user promos, these users would set up many
fake accounts, resulting in delays of up to 20 minutes to validate their
sign-ups. This not only created a poor experience for legitimate new users, but
it also gave the fraudsters time to redeem new-user promos before they were
caught.

During a six month period, Chipper Cash lost 16% of their promo budget to
fraudulent sign-ups — whether duplicates or users with fake or stolen government
IDs. They also had to stop many promos earlier than planned, losing out on the
opportunity to acquire more users.

Solution


DETECTING DUPLICATE SIGN-UPS IN REAL-TIME WITH PINECONE

Samee Zahid, Director of Engineering at Chipper Cash, took the lead in building
an alternative, AI-based solution for faster in-app identity verification. The
team wanted a solution with minimal latency at scale and lower overall costs.
Their key idea was to use visual search to check if the selfie of a new users
closely matches the selfie of any existing user. They learned they could
accomplish this with an AI model (for turning images into ) and a (for storing
and searching through embeddings by similarity).

The engineering team built a proof-of-concept using an open-source database with
basic vector search functionality, and a ConvNet model for turning selfie photos
into embeddings. Once the database was loaded with embeddings of existing user
selfies, they could embed the selfie of each new user and search the database
for similar embeddings. A high similarity score between the new selfie and an
existing selfie would indicate the selfies are of the same person, meaning a
duplicate account.

While the concept worked remarkably well, it became clear that making this work
at low latencies and at their scale would require incredibly tedious and
time-consuming management of the database. Zahid decided to look for a managed
alternative that could provide performance at scale with minimal overhead. The
search started and ended with Pinecone.

> We have a high bar in terms of security and latency for our users. Many
> third-party solutions don’t meet our requirements, so we typically opt to
> build or host in-house. Pinecone proved to deliver so much value — with
> reduced overhead and ultra-low latencies at scale — we didn’t need to do much
> convincing to move forward.

Supported by Pinecone, Chipper Cash’s new identity verification solution is:

 * Built for real-time: With Pinecone, Chipper Cash was able to drastically
   reduce the amount of time needed to verify new sign-ups, especially during
   peak periods. This allows them to retrieve similar selfies of a user in under
   200 milliseconds so they can catch and prevent fraudsters without slowing
   down legitimate new users.
 * Optimizing spend: With real-time verification, there are 10x fewer duplicate
   sign-up attempts. This means more money is going towards acquiring legitimate
   new customers — the intended audience — instead of fraudsters and bots.
   Chipper Cash can now allocate budget spend in a more effective way to help
   them meet their mission.
 * Highly scalable: Supporting billions of vectors at a time, Pinecone provides
   Chipper Cash with the long-term memory needed to continue scaling and adding
   context (i.e. selfies) to their dataset. The more context the application
   has, the faster and more accurate is the verification process.

Zahid and his team were able to fully implement Pinecone into their stack within
a matter of weeks. Using Snowflake as a data warehouse, they generate embeddings
using their Facial Similarity Service (FSS), and then store them in Pinecone.
From there, FSS queries Pinecone to return the top three matches before querying
the Chipper Backend to return match likelihood along with any other helpful
metadata. See the full architectural diagram below for reference:



[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/870e8dcfcccb56eec9b6989752e7b831ad64cc6c-1200x524.png]


Zahid summarized the overall process of implementing Pinecone:

> It took us less than a month to build our new in-house facial verification
> system. We have a real-time, scalable, and secure system thanks to Pinecone.
> End-to-end latencies for the entire system dropped from up to 20 minutes
> previously to less than 2 seconds now, with Pinecone doing the search in under
> 200ms.

Since launching the facial verification system with Pinecone, Chipper Cash has
seen the number of fraudulent sign-ups decrease by 10x. The below graph shows
the results for their user base in Uganda, which is representative of Chipper
Cash’s other markets.



[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/70256e915a0821d74fef2f13c55932fc6a3ca11d-1200x585.png]

result


CATCHING MORE FRAUDULENT SIGN UPS, PREVENTING LOSSES

Chipper Cash has seen dramatic improvements in their identify verification
workflow since launching Pinecone into production:

 * New users’ selfies are verified with over 95% accuracy in less than 2
   seconds.
 * Promo budget gets spent efficiently to acquire legitimate new customers.
 * Fraudulent sign-ups have dropped by 10x across all markets.

Chipper Cash now provides a better user experience by enabling legitimate users
to sign up and redeem promos quickly. And with better screening of fraudulent
sign-ups, they can run longer, more effective promotions. Motivated by this
success, Zahid and his team are now exploring other ways to make meaningful
business impact with AI and the Pinecone vector database.

Share via:

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F019f2985c40a0ed2cfca739bc92996133cb07a6c-200x200.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

Jump to section

 * 
 * 
 * 


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

